Computer Sytem Organization
---------------------------

Basically the architecture can be broken down into a few simplye things.

You have the CPU, then you have the device controllers each of which have their own device driver's to program them, their buffers aka registers.

Then you have the memory where you can read and write data from and to. Lastly you have a system bus connecting them all.

The memroy controller has it's own driver that basically schronizes access to it's memory for the CPU and the device controller's because
both of them compete for the resource.

CPU registers
-------------

It has a memory address register (MAR), which basically stores the memory address for the next read and write.

Memory Buffer Register (MBR) is used to store data that needs was read or needs to be written

I/O Address Register (I/O AR) has the address for the input device that will be read from or written to

I/O Buffer Register (I/O BR) has data that was read from or needs to be written to the I/O Module (basically the device controller's registers)

Memory & I/O Modules
--------------------

The memory module consists of a set of locations defined by sequential numbered addresses.

Some of the address are instructions while others are Data

The I/O Module is basically buffers that hold data read from or written to external devices

NOTE: Buffers and registers aren't the same thing, registers hold data that's actively being worked on by the CPU, while Buffers
temporarily store data to offset the speed differences between the CPU and the hardware parts themselves

Instruction cycle
-----------------

You have the PC (program counter) that stores the address of the next instruction to be fetches

The processor then fetches that information from memory and loads it into the IR (instruction register)

PC is incremented after each fetches

Interrupts
----------

Basically we can't have the CPU (very fast hardware) always taking a break from it's task to keep asking a hardware if it's done doing something or
it has something for it - too much time wasting. Instead we let the hardware (very slow compared to the CPU) interrupt the CPU and tell it it's done.

Polling is where the CPU keeps checking if new events ar taking place, basically it's asking the hardware

More advanced interrupting required interrupt controller hardware. This hardware basically must 1. Defer interrupts during critical processing
2. Have an efficient way to dispatch to the proper interrupt handler 3. Multilevel interrupts going from low to high priority

Also, we have maskable and non-maskable interrupts, because some interrupts require immediate attention while others don't

Two ways to handle interrupts:

1. Disable iterrupts while an interrupt is being handled 
2. Prioritize interrupts based on mutil-level interrupts, where higher priority interrupts get precedence.

Main memory
-----------

Main memory is volatile and implemented in semiconductor technology also called DRAM (dynamic random access memory)

You also have ROM, EPROM and EEPROM which are useful for bootstrap programs; these are programs that load when you start the computer,
they initialize the system, load the kernal and then execute it.

ROM - Read-Only Memory, a type of non-volatile memory where the data is permanently written and can't be erased or modified with normal computer processes
EPROM - Erasable Programmable Read-only Memory, it's a type of memory that can only be erased via UV light
EEPROM - Electronically erasable Read-only memory that doesn't need to be removed from the circuit and can be electrically reprogrammed

Secondary Storage - HDD(mechanical), SSD(Electrical), NVM, etc...


Caching
-------

Caching - copying information into faster storage system, main memory can be viewed as cache for secondary storage

The cache (faster storage) is checked, if information is not found there then data is copied to the cache and used

I/O Structure
-------------

A large portion of the OS is dedicated to handle I/O devices because they are so important. When you have the CPU encounter instruction 
from I/O it executes that insturction by issuing a command to the appropriate I/O module.

You can't handle I/O operations in two ways:

1. Interrupt-driven I/O: Best when you deal with small bytes of data, because as each data comes in, you issue an interrupt, the CPU itself moves
the data to RAM and then resumes what it was doing. It becomes to costly when data size is too big. That's when we doesn
2. Direct Memory Access (DMA): This is when the CPU issues the DMA controller to go to this address to get the I/O data and store it at this address
in the RAM. So the DMA controller then goes on its own and loads it into RAM without much CPU interference anymore. Basically, you reduce interrupt
routines from 1 interrupt per byte to 1 per whole block of code

Computer-System architecture
----------------------------

General-processor: processors that can handle a wide range of tasks and applications

Computer systems can be categorized based on the # of general- processors, there is 3:

- Single-processor systems
- Multiprocessor systems
- Clustered systems

Single-processor systems
------------------------

This is the old days. They also had specialized processors for specific tasks like handling a disk, I/O devices, graphics, etc..

Multiprocessor systems
----------------------

These are also called parallel systems or tightly-coupled systems. Most systems use these nowadays

Two types of multi-processor systems:

1. Symmetric Multiprocessing (SMP) - most common where each processor performs all tasks
2. Asymmetric Muliprocessing - each processor handles a specific task

Symmetric Multiprocessing Architecture (SMP)
--------------------------------------

Each processor has it's own CPU with it's own private Registers along with local and/or private Caches. 
They share a main memory between the two of them by connecting to the system bus.

N processes can run if there are N CPUS

Multicore Systems Architecture
------------------------------

Basically you have one processor(aka. chip) with multiple CPU cores.
Each core has it's own private registers and L1 Cache, but share a local L2 cache with the other cores.
You can also have L3 and L4 caches too if you have more cores, and then those can be divided up between more cores.
So example, you have 8 cores, each core has their own L1 cache, two cores share L2 cache, 4 cores share L3 cache and all 8 share L4 cache(Rare),
mostl you have L3 cache shared between all 8.

Can be more efficient then mutliple CPUs, because on-chip communication is faster then between chips

Also One chip with multiple cores is more power efficient then multiple CPUs with one core 

Dual-core Design (A type of multicore systems architecture)
-----------------------------------------------------------

Basically two cores, each having their own registers and L1 cache, but sharing a local L2 cache.

BTW, multi cores appear as multiple CPUs to the operating system

Non-Uniform Memory Access Systems (NUMA)
----------------------------------------

Basically, each CPU or group of CPUS share their own local memory connected by a fast local bus.
Then those CPUs are all interconnected by a shared system. The drawback, when a CPU must use memory that
doesn't belong to it/its group, but to another CPU of group fo CPUs; this causes latency and performance penalty

Custered Systems - Don't know why this was included, it's more about networks 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Each system (computer) also called nodes runs an application or parts of an application, so that if one fails the other one is still running
and can take over. More efficient. 

Share a storage area caleld Storage-Area Network (SAN).

OS operations
-------------

After the bootstrap programs executes, it starts running the Kernel which in turn starts system daemons (run outside of user control to run OS
system functionalities, network requests and hardware management). Daemons run in between user applications and the kernel, but they only talk to
the kernel to manage background stuff I listed above. 

In Linux, the first program that runs is systemd, which is like the master daemon.

Kernel is interrupt driven, could be a software error, request for OS services (aka system call), or other process problems like infinite loops,
procecesses modifying each other etc.

Multiprogramming and Multitasking
---------------------------------

Multiprogramming is trying to maximize utilization of CPU
Multiprogramming is minimizing reponse time

Virtual memory allows execution of processes not completely in memory.
BTW, data from memory gets COPIED into cache, that's why memory is important

Dual-mode and Multi-mode operations
-----------------------------------

The Mode bit is provided by the hardware, this allows the system to distinguish between User code and kernel code to protect the Sytem
Instuructions usually go from user mode to kernel mode where they are generated by the user, where those actions make systems calls, which are 
then handed to the kernel that executes it and then returns it back to the user

LINUX Timers (important)
------------------------

These timers (kept by the physical clock) are used to basically cause interrupts so that the task don't HOG resources, and only take
up their alloted time.

In linux there is a configuration parameter that sets the number of interrupts that take place per second; it's HZ.
An HZ of 250 means, 250 interrupts per second, which is about 1 every 4ms. So each task has an allotted time of 4ms to complete.

Another variable called "jiffies" tracks how many interrupts have occured since the system booted.

BTW, multi-thread systems have multiple program counters(PC), one per thread.

Cache Coherence
---------------

When one cache gets updated with a new value, all subsequent caches must also be updated with the new value, otherwise
incorrect execution may occur

Basic Definitions
-----------------

CPU - central processing unit, the hardware that executes the instructions 
Processor - the physical chip that has the CPU, caches and registers
Core - The basic computation unit of a CPU
Multicore - Multiple compuation units on the same CPU
Multiprocessor - multiple processors